Add Gateway API recent features blog post (#43619)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-11-1-Gateway-API-Future.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Gateway API Improvements"
date: 2023-10-19T10:00:00-08:00
slug: gateway-api-ga
---

***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), ... TODO

## Backend TLS Policy

> ## HTTPRoute Timeouts

Reviewer: A key enhancement in GatewayAPI's latest release (v1.0.0) is the introduction of the Timeouts field within HTTPRoute Rules. This feature offers a dynamic way to manage timeouts for incoming HTTP requests, adding precision and reliability to your gateway setups.

With Timeouts, developers can fine-tune their Gateway API's behaviour in two fundamental ways:

1. **Request Timeout**:
The request timeout is the duration within which the Gateway API implementation must send a response to a client's HTTP request. It allows flexibility in specifying when this timeout starts, either before or after the entire client request stream is received, making it implementation-specific. This timeout efficiently covers the entire request-response transaction, enhancing the responsiveness of your services.

2. **Backend Request Timeout**:
The backendRequest timeout is a game-changer for those dealing with backends. It sets a timeout for a single request sent from the Gateway to a backend service. This timeout spans from the initiation of the request to the reception of the full response from the backend. This feature is particularly helpful in scenarios where the Gateway needs to retry connections to a backend, ensuring smooth communication under various conditions.

Notably, the request timeout encompasses the backendRequest timeout. Hence, the value of backendRequest should never exceed the value of the request timeout.

The ability to configure these timeouts adds a new layer of reliability to your Kubernetes services. Whether it's ensuring client requests are processed within a specified timeframe or managing backend service communications, GatewayAPI's Timeouts offer the control and predictability you need.

To get started, you can define timeouts in your HTTPRoute Rules using the Timeouts field, specifying their type as Duration. A zero-valued timeout ("0s") disables the timeout, while a valid non-zero-valued timeout should be at least 1ms.

Here's an example of setting request and backendRequest timeouts in an HTTPRoute:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: timeout-example
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: example-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /timeout
    timeouts:
      request: 10s
      backendRequest: 2s
    backendRefs:
    - name: timeout-svc
      port: 8080
```
 
In this example, a request timeout of 10 seconds is defined, ensuring that client requests are processed within that timeframe. Additionally, a 2-second backendRequest timeout is set for individual requests from the Gateway to a backend service called timeout-svc.

These new HTTPRoute Timeouts provide Kubernetes users with more control and flexibility in managing network communications, helping ensure a smoother and more predictable experience for both clients and backends. For additional details and examples, refer to the official [timeouts API documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/#timeouts-optional).

Reviewer 2: Are you suggesting that text as a detail to mention in the article @SRodi ? (it's not clear)

Reviewer: Hi @sftim, I was suggested by @robscott to write some content for HTTPRoute Timeouts given that I was involved in the implementation. I wasn't sure if I had to open a new PR or add on to this, so I just added a comment here for now. Maybe you can help to clarify what I should do, or provide a reference doc (if there is any)? thank you!

Reviewer 2: There's a guide at https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/new-content/blogs-case-studies/

For more details, talk to @howardjohn and @robscott, or ask in #sig-docs-blog on the Kubernetes Slack workspace.

---
layout: blog
title: "Gateway API Improvements"

> date: 2023-10-19T10:00:00-08:00

Reviewer: Should the date be the same as Gateway API v1.0 release date?

> date: 2023-11-27T10:00:00-08:00

Reviewer 3: Please also change the file name to be `2023-11-27-...`.

slug: gateway-api-ga
---

> ***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), Simone Rodigari (IBM), Candace Holman (Red Hat), Gaurav K Ghildiyal (Google), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), Simone Rodigari (IBM), Candace Holman (Red Hat), Gaurav K Ghildiyal (Google), Dave Protasowski (VMware)
```

> Dave Protasowski (VMware)... TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Recently, the [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) [announced its v1.0 GA release](/blog/2023/10/31/gateway-api-ga/), marking a huge milestone for the project.

> Along with stabilizing some of the core functionality in the API, a number of exciting new *experimental* functionality has been added.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Along with stabilizing some of the core functionality in the API, a number of exciting new *experimental* features have been added.
```

`BackendTLSPolicy` is a new Gateway API type used for specifying the TLS configuration of the connection from the Gateway to backend Pods via the Service API object.

> It is specified as a Direct PolicyAttachment without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that accesses a backend, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service to which it is applied.

Reviewer 5: Maybe a link to GEP-713?
```suggestion
It is specified as a [Direct PolicyAttachment](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-713/#direct-policy-attachment) without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that accesses a backend, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service to which it is applied.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: BackendTLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: tls-upstream-auth
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Service
    name: auth-service
    group: ""
  tls:
    caCertRefs:
      - kind: ConfigMapReference
        name: auth-cert
        group: ""
    hostname: auth.example.com
```

The following illustrates a BackendTLSPolicy that configures TLS for a Service serving a backend:

{{< mermaid >}}
flowchart LR
    client(["client"])
    gateway["Gateway"]
    style gateway fill:#02f,color:#fff
    httproute["HTTP<BR>Route"]
    style httproute fill:#02f,color:#fff
    service["Service"]
    style service fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod1["Pod"]
    style pod1 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod2["Pod"]
    style pod2 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    client -.->|HTTP <br> request| gateway
    gateway --> httproute
    httproute -.->|BackendTLSPolicy|service
    service --> pod1 & pod2
{{</ mermaid >}}

For more information, refer to the [documentation for TLS](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls).

## HTTPRoute Timeouts

> A key enhancement in Gateway API's latest release (v1.0.0) is the introduction of the `timeouts` field within HTTPRoute Rules. This feature offers a dynamic way to manage timeouts for incoming HTTP requests, adding precision and reliability to your gateway setups.

Reviewer 4: nit: for consistency.  We use v1.0 in the title and other places.
```suggestion
A key enhancement in Gateway API's latest release (v1.0) is the introduction of the `timeouts` field within HTTPRoute Rules. This feature offers a dynamic way to manage timeouts for incoming HTTP requests, adding precision and reliability to your gateway setups.
```

With Timeouts, developers can fine-tune their Gateway API's behavior in two fundamental ways:

1. **Request Timeout**:

>     The request timeout is the duration within which the Gateway API implementation must send a response to a client's HTTP request. It allows flexibility in specifying when this timeout starts, either before or after the entire client request stream is received, making it implementation-specific. This timeout efficiently covers the entire request-response transaction, enhancing the responsiveness of your services.

Reviewer 3: Please: 1) avoid indent paragraphs by 4-spaces, which may lead the parser to treat your text as code snippets. In this case, indent by 3-spaces would be desirable. 2) wrap the long lines for ease of A) text review/comment B) change tracking, i.e. line-by-line diff with git; C) downstream localization.

```suggestion
   The request timeout is the duration within which the Gateway API implementation
   must send a response to a client's HTTP request. It allows flexibility in
   specifying when this timeout starts, either before or after the entire client
   request stream is received, making it implementation-specific.
   This timeout efficiently covers the entire request-response transaction,
   enhancing the responsiveness of your services.
```

Here's an example of setting request and backendRequest timeouts in an HTTPRoute:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: timeout-example
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: example-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /timeout
    timeouts:
      request: 10s
      backendRequest: 2s
    backendRefs:
    - name: timeout-svc
      port: 8080
```

In this example, a `request` timeout of 10 seconds is defined, ensuring that client requests are processed within that timeframe.
Additionally, a 2-second `backendRequest` timeout is set for individual requests from the Gateway to a backend service called timeout-svc.

These new HTTPRoute Timeouts provide Kubernetes users with more control and flexibility in managing network communications, helping ensure a smoother and more predictable experience for both clients and backends.
For additional details and examples, refer to the [official timeouts API documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/#timeouts-optional).

## Gateway Infrastructure Labels

> While Gateway API providers a common API for different implementations, each implementation will have different resources created under-the-hood to apply users intent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While Gateway API providers a common API for different implementations, each implementation will have different resources created under-the-hood to apply user intent.
```

> This could be configuring cloud load balancers, creating in cluster Pods and Services, or more.

Reviewer 4: nit
```suggestion
This could be configuring cloud load balancers, creating in-cluster Pods and Services, or more.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "New Experimental Features in Gateway API v1.0"
date: 2023-11-02T10:00:00-08:00
slug: gateway-api-ga
---

***Authors:*** Candace Holman (Red Hat), Dave Protasowski (VMware), Gaurav K Ghildiyal (Google), John Howard (Google), Simone Rodigari (IBM)

Recently, the [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) [announced its v1.0 GA release](/blog/2023/10/31/gateway-api-ga/), marking a huge milestone for the project.

Along with stabilizing some of the core functionality in the API, a number of exciting new *experimental* functionality has been added.

## Backend TLS Policy

`BackendTLSPolicy` is a new Gateway API type used for specifying the TLS configuration of the connection from the Gateway to backend Pods via the Service API object.
It is specified as a [Direct PolicyAttachment](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-713/#direct-policy-attachment) without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that accesses a backend, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service to which it is applied.

> One can use the same BackendTLSPolicy for all the different Routes that might point to the referenced Service.

Reviewer 4: I got feedback on similar content in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2547, this is preferred:
```suggestion
All Gateway API Routes that point to a referenced Service should respect a configured BackendTLSPolicy.
```

While there were existing ways provided for [TLS to be configured for edge and passthrough termination](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls/#tls-configuration), this new API object specifically addresses the configuration of TLS in order to convey HTTPS from the Gateway dataplane to the backend.
This is referred to as "backend TLS termination" and enables the Gateway to know how to connect to a backend Pod that has its own certificate.

![Termination Types](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/images/1897-TLStermtypes.png) 

The specification of a BackendTLSPolicy consists of:
- `targetRef` - Defines the targeted API object of the policy.  Only Service is allowed.
- `tls` - Defines the configuration for TLS, including `hostname`, `caCertRefs`, and `wellKnownCACerts`.
- `hostname` - Defines the Server Name Indication (SNI) that the Gateway uses to connect to the backend. The certificate served by the backend must match this SNI.

> handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either `caCertRefs` or `wellKnownCACerts` may be specified, but not both.

Reviewer 4: Remove, or move the last sentence into the `tls` explanation.
```suggestion
handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either `caCertRefs` or `wellKnownCACerts` may be specified, but not both.
```

## Backend TLS Policy

`BackendTLSPolicy` is a new Gateway API type used for specifying the TLS configuration of the connection from the Gateway to backend Pods via the Service API object.
It is specified as a [Direct PolicyAttachment](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-713/#direct-policy-attachment) without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that accesses a backend, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service to which it is applied.
One can use the same BackendTLSPolicy for all the different Routes that might point to the referenced Service.

While there were existing ways provided for [TLS to be configured for edge and passthrough termination](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls/#tls-configuration), this new API object specifically addresses the configuration of TLS in order to convey HTTPS from the Gateway dataplane to the backend.
This is referred to as "backend TLS termination" and enables the Gateway to know how to connect to a backend Pod that has its own certificate.

![Termination Types](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/images/1897-TLStermtypes.png) 

The specification of a BackendTLSPolicy consists of:

> - TargetRef - Defines the targeted API object of the policy.  Only Service is allowed.

Reviewer 6: It looks like we should be using code style for all field names in this blog post, so `targetRef` here, and similar changes throughout: https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-code-style-for-object-field-names-and-namespaces.

- TLS - Defines the configuration for TLS, including Hostname, CACertRefs, and WellKnownCACerts.

> - Hostname - Defines the Server Name Indication (SNI) that the Gateway uses to connect to the backend.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Hostname - Defines the Server Name Indication (SNI) that the Gateway uses to connect to the backend. The certificate served by the backend must match this SNI.
```

    service["Service"]
    style service fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod1["Pod"]
    style pod1 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod2["Pod"]
    style pod2 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    client -.->|HTTP <br> request| gateway
    gateway --> httproute
    httproute -.->|BackendTLSPolicy|service
    service --> pod1 & pod2
{{</ mermaid >}}

## HTTPRoute Timeouts

A key enhancement in Gateway API's latest release (v1.0.0) is the introduction of the `timeouts` field within HTTPRoute Rules. This feature offers a dynamic way to manage timeouts for incoming HTTP requests, adding precision and reliability to your gateway setups.

With Timeouts, developers can fine-tune their Gateway API's behaviour in two fundamental ways:

1. **Request Timeout**:

  The request timeout is the duration within which the Gateway API implementation must send a response to a client's HTTP request. It allows flexibility in specifying when this timeout starts, either before or after the entire client request stream is received, making it implementation-specific. This timeout efficiently covers the entire request-response transaction, enhancing the responsiveness of your services.

1. **Backend Request Timeout**:

>   The backendRequest timeout is a game-changer for those dealing with backends. It sets a timeout for a single request sent from the Gateway to a backend service. This timeout spans from the initiation of the request to the reception of the full response from the backend. This feature is particularly helpful in scenarios where the Gateway needs to retry connections to a backend, ensuring smooth communication under various conditions.

Reviewer 6: This is not rendering as expected per the deploy preview: https://deploy-preview-43619--kubernetes-io-main-staging.netlify.app/blog/2023/11/02/gateway-api-ga/. At a minimum I'd adjust the numbering, but would be great if the indentation could also line up.

Whether it's ensuring client requests are processed within a specified timeframe or managing backend service communications, Gateway API's Timeouts offer the control and predictability you need.

To get started, you can define timeouts in your HTTPRoute Rules using the Timeouts field, specifying their type as Duration.
A zero-valued timeout (`0s`) disables the timeout, while a valid non-zero-valued timeout should be at least 1ms.

Here's an example of setting request and backendRequest timeouts in an HTTPRoute:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: timeout-example
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: example-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /timeout
    timeouts:
      request: 10s
      backendRequest: 2s
    backendRefs:
    - name: timeout-svc
      port: 8080
```

In this example, a `request` timeout of 10 seconds is defined, ensuring that client requests are processed within that timeframe.
Additionally, a 2-second `backendRequest` timeout is set for individual requests from the Gateway to a backend service called timeout-svc.

> These new HTTPRoute Timeouts provide Kubernetes users with more control and flexibility in managing network communications, helping ensure a smoother and more predictable experience for both clients and backends. For additional details and examples, refer to the official timeouts API documentation.

Reviewer 6: This could use a link to https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/#timeouts-optional

## Gateway Infrastructure Labels

While Gateway API providers a common API for different implementations, each implementation will have different resources created under-the-hood to apply users intent.
This could be configuring cloud load balancers, creating in cluster Pods and Services, or more.

While the API has always provided an extension point -- `parametersRef` in `GatewayClass` -- to customize implementation specific things, there was no common core way to express common infrastructure customizations.

Gateway API v1.0 paves the way for this with a new `infrastructure` field on the `Gateway` object, allowing customization of the underlying infrastructure.
For now, this starts small with two critical fields: labels and annotations.
When these are set, any generated infrastructure will have the provided labels and annotations set on them.

For example, I may want to group all my resources for one application together:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: hello-world
spec:
  infrastructure:
    labels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: hello-world
```

> In the future, we are looking into more common infrastructure configurations, such as resource sizing.

Reviewer 6: Comment applies to all sections, but would be helpful to have something like "for more information, refer to the docs for this feature" with a link to relevant documentation or GEP.

One challenge with using policies is that it may be hard to discover which policies are affecting which Gateway resources.
`gwctl` helps bridge this gap by answering questions like:

* Which policies are available for use in the Kubernetes cluster?
* Which policies are attached to a particular Gateway, HTTPRoute, etc?
* If policies are applied to multiple resources in the Gateway resource hierarchy, what is the effective policy that is affecting a particular resource? (For example, if an HTTP request timeout policy is applied to both an HTTPRoute and its parent Gateway, what is the effective timeout for the HTTPRoute?)

`gwctl` is still in the very early phases of development and hence may be a bit rough around the edges.

### Try it out!

```bash
# Clone the Gateway API repository.
git clone https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api.git
# Go to the gwctl directory.
cd gateway-api/gwctl
# Ensure vendor depedencies.
go mod tidy
go mod vendor
# Build the gwctl binary.
go build -o bin/gwctl cmd/main.go
# Add binary to PATH.
export PATH=./bin:${PATH}
# Start using!
gwctl help

> ```

Reviewer 6: I think this may be too much information for a blog post, I'd recommend linking to gwctl Readme at the end of the gwctl section for more information and removing this part.

> `gwctl` is still in the very early phases of development and hence may be a bit rough around the edges.
> 
> ### Try it out!
> 
> ```bash
> # Clone the Gateway API repository.
> git clone https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api.git
> # Go to the gwctl directory.
> cd gateway-api/gwctl
> # Ensure vendor depedencies.
> go mod tidy
> go mod vendor
> # Build the gwctl binary.
> go build -o bin/gwctl cmd/main.go
> # Add binary to PATH.
> export PATH=./bin:${PATH}
> # Start using!
> gwctl help
> ```

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`gwctl` is still in the very early phases of development and hence may be a bit rough around the edges. Follow the instructions in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/tree/main/gwctl#try-it-out to install and try out `gwctl`.
```

### Examples

Here are some examples of how `gwctl` can be used:

```bash
# List all policies in the cluster. This will also give the resource they bind
# to.
gwctl get policies -A
# List all available policy types.
gwctl get policycrds
# Describe all HTTPRoutes in namespace ns2. (Output includes effective policies)
gwctl describe httproutes -n ns2
# Describe a single HTTPRoute in the default namespace. (Output includes
# effective policies)
gwctl describe httproutes my-httproute-1
# Describe all Gateways across all namespaces. (Output includes effective
# policies)
gwctl describe gateways -A
# Describe a single GatewayClass. (Output includes effective policies)
gwctl describe gatewayclasses foo-com-external-gateway-class

> ```

Reviewer 6: This could benefit from some kind of conclusion to tie everything together. Maybe something that looks awfully similar to https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/10/31/gateway-api-ga/#get-involved?

---
layout: blog

> title: "Gateway API Improvements"

Reviewer 6: Maybe something like this?
```suggestion
title: "New Experimental Features in Gateway API v1.0"
```

date: 2023-10-19T10:00:00-08:00
slug: gateway-api-ga
---

> ***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), ... TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), Simone Rodigari (IBM), ... TODO
```

> ***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), ... TODO

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), Simone Rodigari (IBM), Candace Holman (Red Hat),  ... TODO
```

> ***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), ... TODO

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
***Authors:*** John Howard (Google), Simone Rodigari (IBM), Candace Holman (Red Hat), Gaurav K Ghildiyal (Google), ... TODO
```

> ## Backend TLS Policy

Reviewer 6: @candita Do you mind adding content here as a comment in the next ~24 hours?

Reviewer 4: `BackendTLSPolicy` is a new Gateway API type used for specifying the TLS configuration of the connection from the Gateway to backend Pods via the Service API object.  It is specified as a Direct PolicyAttachment without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that accesses a backend, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service to which it is applied.   One can use the same BackendTLSPolicy for all the different Routes that might point to the referenced Service.

While there were existing ways provided for [TLS to be configured for edge and passthrough termination](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls/?h=tls#tls-configuration), this new API object specifically addresses the configuration of TLS in order to convey HTTPS from the Gateway dataplane to the backend.  This is referred to as "backend TLS termination" and enables the Gateway to know how to connect to a backend Pod that has its own certificate.  

![Termination Types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/geps/images/1897-TLStermtypes.png) 

The specification of a BackendTLSPolicy consists of:
- TargetRef - Defines the targeted API object of the policy.  Only Service is allowed.
- TLS - Defines the configuration for TLS, including Hostname, CACertRefs, and WellKnownCACerts.
- Hostname - Defines the Server Name Indication (SNI) that the Gateway uses to connect to the backend.
- CACertRefs - Defines one or more references to objects that contain PEM-encoded TLS certificates,
which are used to establish a TLS handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either CACertRefs or WellKnownCACerts may be specified, but not both.
- WellKnownCACerts - Specifies whether or not system CA certificates may be used in the TLS
handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either CACertRefs or WellKnownCACerts may be specified, but not both.

### Examples

#### Using System Certificates

In this example, the `BackendTLSPolicy` is configured to use system certificates to connect with a TLS-encrypted upstream connection where Pods backing the `dev` Service are expected to serve a valid certificate for `dev.example.com`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: BackendTLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: tls-upstream-dev
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Service
    name: dev-service
    group: ""
  tls:
    wellKnownCACerts: "System"
    hostname: dev.example.com
```

#### Using Explicit CA Certificates

In this example, the `BackendTLSPolicy` is configured to use certificates definedin the configuration map `auth-cert` to connect with a TLS-encrypted upstream connection where Pods backing the `auth` Service are expected to serve a valid certificate for `auth.example.com`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: BackendTLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: tls-upstream-auth
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Service
    name: auth-service
    group: ""
  tls:
    caCertRefs:
      - kind: ConfigMapReference
        name: auth-cert
        group: ""
    hostname: auth.example.com
```

_(To editor: If there's space, and you want this, use it. It's not really necessary, but who doesn't like pictures)_
The following illustrates a BackendTLSPolicy that configures TLS for a Service serving a backend:
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    client(["client"])
    gateway["Gateway"]
    style gateway fill:#02f,color:#fff
    httproute["HTTP<BR>Route"]
    style httproute fill:#02f,color:#fff
    service["Service"]
    style service fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod1["Pod"]
    style pod1 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod2["Pod"]
    style pod2 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    client -.->|HTTP <br> request| gateway
    gateway --> httproute
    httproute -.->|BackendTLSPolicy|service
    service --> pod1 & pod2
```

Reviewer 2: Need to get this Markdown back? Use GitHub's web UI to “quote reply”, then select all the text and click on the block quote icon. Now you have the Markdown of https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43619#discussion_r1373905020 in your editor. Copy it and cancel the comment.

Reviewer 4: @sftim I'm following @robscott's request to contribute via https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43619/files#r1373535941.  @howardjohn is this what you'd like to work with?

Reviewer 4: This is probably easier:

```suggestion
## Backend TLS Policy

`BackendTLSPolicy` is a new Gateway API type used for specifying the TLS configuration of the connection from the Gateway to backend Pods via the Service API object.  It is specified as a Direct PolicyAttachment without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that accesses a backend, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service to which it is applied.   One can use the same BackendTLSPolicy for all the different Routes that might point to the referenced Service.

While there were existing ways provided for [TLS to be configured for edge and passthrough termination](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls/#tls-configuration), this new API object specifically addresses the configuration of TLS in order to convey HTTPS from the Gateway dataplane to the backend.  This is referred to as "backend TLS termination" and enables the Gateway to know how to connect to a backend Pod that has its own certificate.  

![Termination Types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/geps/images/1897-TLStermtypes.png) 

The specification of a BackendTLSPolicy consists of:
- TargetRef - Defines the targeted API object of the policy.  Only Service is allowed.
- TLS - Defines the configuration for TLS, including Hostname, CACertRefs, and WellKnownCACerts.
- Hostname - Defines the Server Name Indication (SNI) that the Gateway uses to connect to the backend.
- CACertRefs - Defines one or more references to objects that contain PEM-encoded TLS certificates,
which are used to establish a TLS handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either CACertRefs or WellKnownCACerts may be specified, but not both.
- WellKnownCACerts - Specifies whether or not system CA certificates may be used in the TLS
handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either CACertRefs or WellKnownCACerts may be specified, but not both.

### Examples

#### Using System Certificates

In this example, the `BackendTLSPolicy` is configured to use system certificates to connect with a TLS-encrypted upstream connection where Pods backing the `dev` Service are expected to serve a valid certificate for `dev.example.com`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: BackendTLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: tls-upstream-dev
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Service
    name: dev-service
    group: ""
  tls:
    wellKnownCACerts: "System"
    hostname: dev.example.com
```

#### Using Explicit CA Certificates

In this example, the `BackendTLSPolicy` is configured to use certificates definedin the configuration map `auth-cert` to connect with a TLS-encrypted upstream connection where Pods backing the `auth` Service are expected to serve a valid certificate for `auth.example.com`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: BackendTLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: tls-upstream-auth
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Service
    name: auth-service
    group: ""
  tls:
    caCertRefs:
      - kind: ConfigMapReference
        name: auth-cert
        group: ""
    hostname: auth.example.com
```

_(To editor: If there's space, and you want this, use it. It's not really necessary, but who doesn't like pictures)_
The following illustrates a BackendTLSPolicy that configures TLS for a Service serving a backend:
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    client(["client"])
    gateway["Gateway"]
    style gateway fill:#02f,color:#fff
    httproute["HTTP<BR>Route"]
    style httproute fill:#02f,color:#fff
    service["Service"]
    style service fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod1["Pod"]
    style pod1 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod2["Pod"]
    style pod2 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    client -.->|HTTP <br> request| gateway
    gateway --> httproute
    httproute -.->|BackendTLSPolicy|service
    service --> pod1 & pod2
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Backend TLS Policy
## Backend TLS Policy

`BackendTLSPolicy` is a new Gateway API type used for specifying the TLS configuration of the connection from the Gateway to backend Pods via the Service API object.  It is specified as a Direct PolicyAttachment without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that accesses a backend, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service to which it is applied.   One can use the same BackendTLSPolicy for all the different Routes that might point to the referenced Service.

While there were existing ways provided for [TLS to be configured for edge and passthrough termination](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls/#tls-configuration), this new API object specifically addresses the configuration of TLS in order to convey HTTPS from the Gateway dataplane to the backend.  This is referred to as "backend TLS termination" and enables the Gateway to know how to connect to a backend Pod that has its own certificate.  

![Termination Types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/geps/images/1897-TLStermtypes.png) 

The specification of a BackendTLSPolicy consists of:
- TargetRef - Defines the targeted API object of the policy.  Only Service is allowed.
- TLS - Defines the configuration for TLS, including Hostname, CACertRefs, and WellKnownCACerts.
- Hostname - Defines the Server Name Indication (SNI) that the Gateway uses to connect to the backend.
- CACertRefs - Defines one or more references to objects that contain PEM-encoded TLS certificates,
which are used to establish a TLS handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either CACertRefs or WellKnownCACerts may be specified, but not both.
- WellKnownCACerts - Specifies whether or not system CA certificates may be used in the TLS
handshake between the Gateway and backend.  Either CACertRefs or WellKnownCACerts may be specified, but not both.

### Examples

#### Using System Certificates

In this example, the `BackendTLSPolicy` is configured to use system certificates to connect with a TLS-encrypted upstream connection where Pods backing the `dev` Service are expected to serve a valid certificate for `dev.example.com`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: BackendTLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: tls-upstream-dev
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Service
    name: dev-service
    group: ""
  tls:
    wellKnownCACerts: "System"
    hostname: dev.example.com
```

#### Using Explicit CA Certificates

In this example, the `BackendTLSPolicy` is configured to use certificates definedin the configuration map `auth-cert` to connect with a TLS-encrypted upstream connection where Pods backing the `auth` Service are expected to serve a valid certificate for `auth.example.com`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: BackendTLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: tls-upstream-auth
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Service
    name: auth-service
    group: ""
  tls:
    caCertRefs:
      - kind: ConfigMapReference
        name: auth-cert
        group: ""
    hostname: auth.example.com
```

_(To editor: If there's space, and you want this, use it. It's not really necessary, but who doesn't like pictures)_
The following illustrates a BackendTLSPolicy that configures TLS for a Service serving a backend:
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    client(["client"])
    gateway["Gateway"]
    style gateway fill:#02f,color:#fff
    httproute["HTTP<BR>Route"]
    style httproute fill:#02f,color:#fff
    service["Service"]
    style service fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod1["Pod"]
    style pod1 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    pod2["Pod"]
    style pod2 fill:#02f,color:#fff
    client -.->|HTTP <br> request| gateway
    gateway --> httproute
    httproute -.->|BackendTLSPolicy|service
    service --> pod1 & pod2
```
```

While Gateway API providers a common API for different implementations, each implementation will have different resources created under-the-hood to apply users intent.
This could be configuring cloud load balancers, creating in cluster Pods and Services, or more.

While the API has always provided an extension point -- `parametersRef` in `GatewayClass` -- to customize implementation specific things, there was no common core way to express common infrastructure customizations.

Gateway API v1.0 paves the way for this with a new `infrastructure` field on the `Gateway` object, allowing customization of the underlying infrastructure.
For now, this starts small with two critical fields: labels and annotations.
When these are set, any generated infrastructure will have the provided labels and annotations set on them.

For example, I may want to group all my resources for one application together:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: hello-world
spec:
  infrastructure:
    labels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: hello-world
```

In the future, we are looking into more common infrastructure configurations, such as resource sizing.

> ## Support for Websockets, HTTP/2 and more!

Reviewer 6: @dprotaso Do you mind adding content here as a comment in the next ~24 hours?

Reviewer 8: done

> ## Support for Websockets, HTTP/2 and more!

Reviewer 8: ````suggestion
## Support for Websockets, HTTP/2 and more!

Not all implementations of Gateway API support automatic protocol selection. In some cases protocols are disabled without an explicit opt-in. 

When a Route's backend references a Kubernetes Service, application developers can specify the protocol using `ServicePort` [`appProtocol`][appProtocol] field.

For example the following `store` Kubernetes Service is indicating the port `8080` supports HTTP/2 Prior Knowledge.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: store
spec:
  selector:
    app: store
  ports:
  - protocol: TCP
    appProtocol: kubernetes.io/h2c
    port: 8080
    targetPort: 8080
```

Currently, Gateway API has conformance testing for:

- `kubernetes.io/h2c` - HTTP/2 Prior Knowledge
- `kubernetes.io/ws` - WebSocket over HTTP

[appProtocol]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#application-protocol
````

> ## `gwctl`, our new Gateway API command line tool

Reviewer 6: @gauravkghildiyal Do you mind adding content here as a comment in the next ~24 hours? (We can also leave this for a future blog post if you'd prefer).

Reviewer 7: Thanks for the reminder, Rob!

> ## `gwctl`, our new Gateway API command line tool

Reviewer 7: ````suggestion
## `gwctl`, our new Gateway API command line tool

`gwctl` is a command line tool that aims to be a `kubectl` replacement for viewing Gateway API resources.

The initial release of `gwctl` that comes bundled with Gateway v1.0 release includes helpful features for managing Gateway API Policies. Gateway API Policies serve as powerful extension mechanisms for modifying the behaviour of Gateway resources. One challenge with using policies is that it may be hard to discover which policies are affecting which Gateway resources. `gwctl` helps bridge this gap by answering questions like:

* Which policies are available for use in the Kubernetes cluster?
* Which policies are attached to a particular Gateway, HTTPRoute, etc?
* If policies are applied to multiple resources in the Gateway resource hierarchy, what is the effective policy that is affecting a particular resource? (For example, if an HTTP request timeout policy is applied to both an HTTPRoute and its parent Gateway, what is the effective timeout for the HTTPRoute?)

`gwctl` is still in the very early phases of development and hence may be a bit rough around the edges.

### Try it out!

```bash
# Clone the Gateway API repository.
git clone https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api.git

# Go to the gwctl directory.
cd gateway-api/gwctl

# Ensure vendor depedencies.
go mod tidy
go mod vendor

# Build the gwctl binary.
go build -o bin/gwctl cmd/main.go

# Add binary to PATH.
export PATH=./bin:${PATH}

# Start using!
gwctl help
```

### Examples
Here are some examples of how `gwctl` can be used:

```bash
# List all policies in the cluster. This will also give the resource they bind
# to.
gwctl get policies -A

# List all available policy types.
gwctl get policycrds

# Describe all HTTPRoutes in namespace ns2. (Output includes effective policies)
gwctl describe httproutes -n ns2

# Describe a single HTTPRoute in the default namespace. (Output includes
# effective policies)
gwctl describe httproutes my-httproute-1

# Describe all Gateways across all namespaces. (Output includes effective
# policies)
gwctl describe gateways -A

# Describe a single GatewayClass. (Output includes effective policies)
gwctl describe gatewayclasses foo-com-external-gateway-class
```

````
